---
layout: page
title: "DNDS6290: Network inference and reconstruction"
description: The final project for DNDS6290.
img: assets/img/dnds6290_bg.png
importance: 5
tag: network-science
category: work
---

<a id="top"></a>
<br>
<div align="center">
  
  <h5 align="center">DNDS6290: Network Inference and Reconstruction - Final Project</h5>
  <h3>The neuron network in the asymmetrical bodies of fruit fly <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> brain</h3>

  <div align="center">
    Jun Yamamoto
    <br>
    Department of Network and Data Sciences
    <br>
    29-03-2024  
    <br>
    <br>
    <b>Abstract</b>
    <br>
    <div style="display: inline-block; text-align: left; width: 800px;">
      In this project, we examine the physical network of the neurons that contain synapses within the left and right asymmetrical bodies of fruit fly <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> brain and investigate how well encoded the physical layout of a physical network may be by its purely topological network. To this end, we test various stochastic block models to identify the most appropriate model with the shortest description length for the topological network of fruit fly neurons and then consider the relation between the best (hierarchical) block structure and the physical layouts of the neurons. We find that the block structure reflects the physicality of the neurons, highlighting the redundancy of the physical layout. 
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<a id="introduction"></a>
## 1. Introduction

There are growing interests in physical networks, *i.e.*, networks whose nodes and edges consist of physical objects. The physicality of nodes and edges constrains the network structures, since nodes and edges cannot overlap. The additional condition from the physicality results in the emergence of some unique topological characteristics, such as edge bundling (*i.e.*, the formation of physically parallel edges; [[Bonamassa2024](#bonamassa2024bundling)]) and cycle linkings (*i.e.*, entanglements; [[Liu2021](#liu2021isotopy)], [[Glover2024](#glover2024measuring)]). The increasing availability of three-dimensional physical datasets in recent years motivates interdisciplinary efforts to understand the common features observed in those systems via extensions of network science took-kits for physical networks [[Dehmamy2018](#dehmamy2018structural), [Pósfai2024](#posfai2024impact), [Pete2023](#pete2023network)]. There remains, however, an important but unaddressed question: **should a physical network be treated as a physical one, rather than a conventional network?** In other words, **is the physical layout of a physical network redundant?** Following the principle of parsimony, *i.e.* one should prefer a simpler model, it is important to discard the physicality, if the information from it is completely redundant. We attempt to explore the physicality information contained in the topological network of a physical network.

To this end, we examine the physical structures of neurons in the central brain of fruit fly *Drosophila melanogaster*, one of the large-scale empirical physical networks which recently became publicaly available [[Scheffer2020](#scheffer2020connectome)]. The dataset consists of over 25,000 neurons and 20 million synapses, equipped with both connectivity information and physical structures. In this work, we take the topological network of the neurons' connectivity in the left and right asymmetrical bodies in the central complex of fruit fly brain that plays a role in sensory integration and motor control. The choice of the brain region is made from computational and time constraints, to keep the network size reasonably small but not too small. We then infer the community structures of the topological network by various stochastic block models and investigate whether and how the mesoscopic structures of the topological network reflects the physical layout of the network.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>

<a id="figure"></a>
## 2. Figures
- [[Fig. 1](/assets/html/ff_neuron_AB.html)]: The left and right asymmetrical bodies in fruit fly brain.
- [[Fig. 2](/assets/html/ff_neuron_AB_neurons.html)]: The neurons in the left and right asymmetrical bodies in fruit fly brain.
- [[Fig. 3](/assets/pdf/project/ff_neuron_AB_LM_NDC_Nested_partition-best_w-rois.pdf)]: The hierarchical drawing of the topological network of neurons in the left and right asymmetrical bodies in fruit fly brain.
- [[Fig. 4](/assets/html/ff_neuron_AB_LM_NDC_Nested_level2.html)]: The neurons contained in each partition (at level 2) found in the latent Poisson multigraph non-degree-corrected nested SBM. 
- [[Fig. 5](/assets/html/ff_neuron_AB_LM_NDC_Nested_level1.html)]: The neurons contained in each partition (at level 1) found in the latent Poisson multigraph non-degree-corrected nested SBM. 

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>


<a id="references"></a>
## References

<a class="anchor" id="bonamassa2024bundling">[Bonamassa2024]</a> I. Bonamassa, B. Ráth, M. Pósfai, M. Abért, D. Keliger, B. Szegedy, J. Kertész, L. Lovász, and A.-L. Barabási, Bundling by Volume Exclusion in Non-Equilibrium Spaghetti, arXiv:2401.02579.

<a class="anchor" id="liu2021isotopy">[Liu2021]</a> Y. Liu, N. Dehmamy, and A.-L. Barabási, Isotopy and Energy of Physical Networks, Nat. Phys. 17, 2 (2021).

<a class="anchor" id="glover2024measuring">[Glover2024]</a> C. Glover and A.-L. Barabási, Measuring Entanglement in Physical Networks, arXiv:2403.01328.

<a class="anchor" id="dehmamy2018structural">[Dehmamy2018]</a> N. Dehmamy, S. Milanlouei, and A.-L. Barabási, A Structural Transition in Physical Networks, Nature 563, 7733 (2018).

<a class="anchor" id="pete2023network">[Pete2023]</a> G. Pete, Á. Timár, S. Ö. Stefánsson, I. Bonamassa, and M. Pósfai, A Network-of-Networks Model for Physical Networks, arXiv:2306.01583.

<a class="anchor" id="posfai2024impact">[Pósfai2024]</a> M. Pósfai, B. Szegedy, I. Bačić, L. Blagojević, M. Abért, J. Kertész, L. Lovász, and A.-L. Barabási, Impact of Physicality on Network Structure, Nat. Phys. 20, 142 (2024).

<a class="anchor" id="scheffer2020connectome">[Scheffer2020]</a> L. K. Scheffer et al., "A Connectome and Analysis of the Adult Drosophila Central Brain", eLife 9, e57443 (2020).

<a class="anchor" id="peixoto2019bayesian">[Peixoto2019]</a> T. P. Peixoto, Bayesian Stochastic Blockmodeling, in (2019), pp. 289–332.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>

